Citation Nr: 0832955	
Decision Date: 09/25/08    Archive Date: 09/30/08

DOCKET NO.  07-03 410	)	DATE
	)
	)

On appeal from the
Department of Veterans Affairs Regional Office in Nashville, 
Tennessee


THE ISSUE

Entitlement to service connection for post-traumatic stress 
disorder (PTSD).


REPRESENTATION

Appellant represented by:	Tennessee Department of 
Veterans' Affairs


ATTORNEY FOR THE BOARD

K. Gielow, Associate Counsel


INTRODUCTION

The veteran served on active duty from June 1943 to February 
1946.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (BVA) 
from a rating decision of the Department of Veterans Affairs 
(VA) Regional Office (RO) in  
Nashville, Tennessee.


FINDINGS OF FACT

1.  The veteran did not engage in combat with the enemy.

2.  The evidence of record does not corroborate the veteran's 
claimed in-service stressors.


CONCLUSION OF LAW

PTSD was not incurred in or aggravated by active service.  
38 U.S.C.A. §§ 1131, 5103(a), 5103A, 5107 (West 2002); 38 
C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.159, 3.303, 3.304(f), 4.125 (2007).


REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSION

Under the relevant laws and regulations, service connection 
may be granted for a disability resulting from disease or 
injury incurred in or aggravated by active service.  38 
U.S.C.A. §§ 1110, 1131 (West 2002).  If a chronic disease is 
shown in service, subsequent manifestations of the same 
chronic disease at any later date, however remote, may be 
service connected, unless clearly attributable to 
intercurrent causes.  38 C.F.R. § 3.303(b) (2007).  However, 
continuity of symptoms is required where a condition in 
service is noted but is not, in fact, chronic or where a 
diagnosis of chronicity may be legitimately questioned.  38 
C.F.R. § 3.303(b) (2007).

Further, service connection may also be granted for any 
disease diagnosed after discharge, when all the evidence, 
including that pertinent to service, establishes that the 
disease was incurred in service.  38 U.S.C.A. § 1113(b) (West 
2002); 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(d) (2007).  The Board must determine 
whether the evidence supports the claim or is in relative 
equipoise, with the appellant prevailing in either case, or 
whether the preponderance of the evidence is against the 
claim, in which case, service connection must be denied.  
Gilbert v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 49 (1990).

In order to establish service connection for PTSD, the 
evidence of record must include a medical diagnosis of the 
condition in accordance with 38 C.F.R. § 4.125(a), a link, 
established by medical evidence, between current symptoms and 
an in-service stressor; and credible supporting evidence that 
the claimed in-service stressor occurred.  38 C.F.R. 
§ 3.304(f).  The provisions of 38 C.F.R. § 4.125(a) require 
that a diagnosis of a mental disorder conform to the 
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual, Fourth Edition (DSM-IV).  

As set forth under DSM-IV, a valid diagnosis of PTSD requires 
that a person has been exposed to a traumatic event in which 
both of the following were present: 
(1) the person experienced, witnessed, or was confronted with 
an event or events that involved actual or threatened death 
or serious injury, or a threat to the physical integrity of 
himself or others, and (2) the person's response involved 
intense fear, helplessness, or horror.

The law provides that "[i]f the evidence establishes that 
the veteran engaged in combat with the enemy and the claimed 
stressor is related to that combat, in the absence of clear 
and convincing evidence to the contrary, and provided that 
the claimed stressor is consistent with the circumstances, 
conditions, or hardships of the veteran's service, the 
veteran's lay testimony alone may establish the occurrence of 
the claimed in-service stressor."  38 C.F.R. 
§ 3.304(f)(1)(2007).  

Where, however, VA determines that the veteran did not engage 
in combat with the enemy, or that the veteran did engage in 
combat with the enemy but the claimed stressor is unrelated 
to such combat, the veteran's lay testimony, by itself, will 
not be enough to establish the occurrence of the alleged 
stressor.  Instead, the record must contain evidence that 
corroborates the veteran's testimony as to the occurrence of 
the claimed stressor.  See 38 U.S.C.A. § 1154(b) (West 2002); 
38 C.F.R. § 3.304(d),(f); West v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 70, 76 
(1994).

Service connection may only be granted for a current 
disability; when a claimed condition is not shown, there may 
be no grant of service connection.  See 38 U.S.C.A. § 1110 
(West 2002); Rabideau v. Derwinski, 2 Vet. App. 141 (1992) 
(Congress specifically limits entitlement for service-
connected disease or injury to cases where such incidents 
have resulted in a disability).  "In the absence of proof of 
a present disability there can be no valid claim."  See 
Brammer v. Derwinski, 3 Vet. App. 223, 225 (1992).  

In this case, the veteran alleges that he suffers from PTSD 
due to witnessing "killing and shooting" and being 
subjected to air raids by the enemy during his service in 
World War II.  Specifically, he contends that, while 
unloading cargo at the port or dock, enemy bombs injured and 
killed members of his unit and hit and sunk a nearby supply 
ship.      

As an initial matter, the Board notes that the veteran's 
service personnel records were unavailable and appear to have 
been destroyed in a 1973 fire at the National Personnel 
Records Center (NPRC) in St. Louis, Missouri.  The Board 
recognizes that in such cases there is a heightened 
obligation to assist the appellant in the development of the 
case, a heightened obligation to explain findings and 
conclusions, and a heightened duty to consider carefully the 
benefit of the doubt rule in cases, such as in this 
situation, in which records are presumed to have been or were 
destroyed while the file was in the possession of the 
government.  See Washington v. Nicholson, 19 Vet. App. 362, 
369-70 (2005); see also Cromer v. Nicholson, 19 Vet. App. 
215, 217 (2005) (citing O'Hare v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 365, 
367 (1991)).  

Despite the heightened duty and notwithstanding the 
appellant's assertions, the Board finds that his claim fails 
because his in-service stressors cannot be verified.

The preponderance of the evidence shows that the veteran did 
not engage in combat with the enemy.  While he has asserted 
that he was subjected to enemy bomb attacks and air raids, he 
was not awarded any combat medals or decorations.  Moreover, 
his summary of military occupations shows that he worked 
cook, mainly operating in the tent kitchen but occasionally 
delivering food to fellow soldiers at their posts.    

For these reasons, the Board finds that the veteran did not 
engage in combat with the enemy within the meaning of 38 
U.S.C.A. § 1154(b).  See Gaines v. West, 
11 Vet. App. 353, 359 (1998).  Accordingly, his statements 
and testimony concerning the alleged stressors may not be 
accepted, standing alone, as sufficient proof of their 
occurrence.  Therefore, independent evidence is necessary to 
corroborate his statement as to the occurrence of the claimed 
stressor.  Doran v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 283, 288-89 (1994).  

After a review of the claims file, the Board finds that the 
evidence of record does not corroborate the veteran's claimed 
in-service stressors.  When describing the enemy attacks and 
shooting incidents, the veteran was unable to identify the 
location of the events, the dates the events occurred, or 
names of persons injured.  The lack of specificity renders it 
impossible to verify stressors.

In July 2008, VA issued a formal finding regarding the lack 
of information provided by the veteran.  VA expressly 
determined that the information described was insufficient to 
send to the U.S. Army and Joint Services Records Research 
Center (JSRRC) or to allow for meaningful research of the 
National Archives and Records Administration (NARA) records.  
The Memorandum stated that all efforts to obtain the 
necessary information had been exhausted and that any further 
attempts to obtain additional information from the veteran 
would be futile.  

In Pentecost v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 124 (2002), the United 
States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court) pointed 
out that corroboration of every detail of a stressor under 
such circumstances, such as the claimant's own personal 
involvement, is not necessary.  See also Suozzi v. Brown, 10 
Vet. App. 307 (1997).  However, given the absence of 
specificity surrounding the shooting incidents or enemy air 
raids, the Board finds that the stressors cannot be verified.  
As noted above, he has not provided details regarding the 
approximate date, location, or persons involved for either 
alleged in-service stressor.

In consideration of the above, the Board finds that the in-
service stressors identified by the veteran have not been 
verified as is necessary to establish a claim for PTSD 
pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 3.304(f).  Because the stressors 
cannot be verified, the Board need not reach the issue of 
whether he has a current diagnosis of PTSD.  

Finally, as provided for by the Veterans Claims Assistance 
Act of 2000 (VCAA), VA has a duty to notify and assist 
claimants in substantiating a claim for VA benefits.  
38 U.S.C.A. §§ 5100, 5102, 5103, 5103A, 5107, 5126 (West 2002 
& Supp. 2007); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.156(a), 3.159 (as 
amended), 3.326(a) (2007).  

Proper notice from VA must inform the claimant of any 
information and medical or lay evidence not of record (1) 
that is necessary to substantiate the claim; (2) that VA will 
seek to provide; and (3) that the claimant is expected to 
provide.  Quartuccio v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 183 (2002).  
This notice must be provided prior to an initial unfavorable 
decision on a claim by the RO.  Mayfield v. Nicholson, 444 
F.3d 1328 (Fed. Cir. 2006); Pelegrini v. Principi, 18 Vet. 
App. 112 (2004).  

In addition, the notice requirements of the VCAA apply to all 
five elements of a service-connection claim, including: (1) 
veteran status; (2) existence of a disability; (3) a 
connection between the veteran's service and the disability; 
(4) degree of disability; and (5) effective date of the 
disability.  See Dingess/Hartman v. Nicholson, 19 Vet. App. 
473 (2006).  Further, this notice must include information 
that a disability rating and an effective date for the award 
of benefits will be assigned if service connection is 
awarded.  Id. at 486.  

VCAA notice errors are presumed prejudicial unless VA shows 
that the error did not affect the essential fairness of the 
adjudication.  To overcome the burden of prejudicial error, 
VA must show (1) that any defect was cured by actual 
knowledge on the part of the claimant; (2) that a reasonable 
person could be expected to understand from the notice what 
was needed; or, (3) that a benefit could not have been 
awarded as a matter of law.  See Sanders v. Nicholson, 487 
F.3d 881 (Fed. Cir. 2007).  

Here, the VCAA duty to notify was satisfied by way of a 
letter sent to the veteran in February 2006 that fully 
addressed all notice elements and was sent prior to the 
initial RO decision in this matter.  The letter informed him 
of what evidence was required to substantiate the claim and 
of his and VA's respective duties for obtaining evidence.    

There is no allegation from the veteran that he has any 
evidence in his possession that is needed for full and fair 
adjudication of this claim.  Under these circumstances, the 
Board finds that the notification requirements of the VCAA 
have been satisfied as to both timing and content.

With respect to the Dingess requirements, in November 2006, 
the RO also provided the veteran with notice of what type of 
information and evidence was needed to establish a disability 
rating, as well as notice of the type of evidence necessary 
to establish an effective date.  With that letter, the RO 
effectively satisfied the remaining notice requirements with 
respect to the issue on appeal.  Therefore, adequate notice 
was provided to the veteran prior to the transfer and 
certification of his case to the Board and complied with the 
requirements of 38 U.S.C.A. § 5103(a) and 38 C.F.R. § 
3.159(b).  

Next, VA has a duty to assist the veteran in the development 
of the claim.  This duty includes assisting him in the 
procurement of service medical records and pertinent 
treatment records and providing an examination when 
necessary.  38 U.S.C.A. § 5103A; 38 C.F.R. § 3.159.  

In determining whether the duty to assist requires that a VA 
medical examination be provided or medical opinion obtained 
with respect to a veteran's claim for benefits, there are 
four factors for consideration.  

These four factors are:  (1) competent evidence of a current 
disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a 
disability; (2) evidence establishing an in-service event, 
injury, or disease, or manifestations of certain diseases 
during the presumptive period; (3) an indication that the 
disability or symptoms may be associated with service; and 
(4) whether there otherwise is sufficient competent medical 
evidence of record to make a decision on the claim.  
38 U.S.C. § 5103A(d); 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c)(4).  

With respect to the third factor above, the types of evidence 
that "indicate" that a current disability "may be 
associated" with service include, but are not limited to, 
medical evidence that suggests a nexus but is too equivocal 
or lacking in specificity to support a decision on the 
merits, or credible evidence of continuity of symptomatology 
such as pain or other symptoms capable of lay observation.  
McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79 (2006).  

The Board finds that all necessary development has been 
accomplished, and therefore appellate review may proceed 
without prejudice to the veteran.  See Bernard v. Brown, 4 
Vet. App. 384 (1993).  

In this case, the veteran's statements as to stressors lack 
specificity and cannot be verified.  By definition, the claim 
must be denied because an essential element cannot be 
confirmed.  Therefore, a remand for a VA examination in order 
to determine whether he has PTSD is not in order.  

Moreover, the RO has obtained service personnel records and 
VA outpatient treatment records, and the veteran and his 
representative have submitted statements on his behalf.  
Therefore, the available records have been obtained in order 
to make an adequate determination as to this claim.  

Significantly, neither the veteran nor his representative has 
identified, and the record does not otherwise indicate, any 
additional existing evidence that is necessary for a fair 
adjudication of the claim that has not been obtained.  
Hence, no further notice or assistance is required to fulfill 
VA's duty to assist in the development of the claim.  Smith 
v. Gober, 14 Vet. App. 227 (2000), aff'd, 281 F.3d 1384 (Fed. 
Cir. 2002); Dela Cruz v. Principi, 15 Vet. App. 143.


ORDER

Service connection for PTSD is denied.



____________________________________________
L. HOWELL
Veterans Law Judge, Board of Veterans' Appeals


 Department of Veterans Affairs


