Citation Nr: 1038290	
Decision Date: 10/12/10    Archive Date: 10/22/10

DOCKET NO.  03-15 296	)	DATE
	)

On appeal from the
Department of Veterans Affairs Regional Office in Pittsburgh, 
Pennsylvania


THE ISSUE

Entitlement to service connection for posttraumatic stress 
disorder (PTSD).


REPRESENTATION

Appellant represented by:	The American Legion


ATTORNEY FOR THE BOARD

B. Elwood, Associate Counsel


INTRODUCTION

The Veteran served on active duty from November 1972 to August 
1976.

This matter initially came before the Board of Veterans' Appeals 
(Board) from a November 2002 rating decision of the Department of 
Veterans' Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO) in Pittsburgh, 
Pennsylvania.  In that decision, the RO denied entitlement to 
service connection for PTSD.

In May 2004, the Board remanded this matter for further 
development.

In April 2009, the Board denied the Veteran's claim for service 
connection for PTSD.  The Veteran appealed the Board's denial to 
the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court).

In July 2010, the Court vacated the Board's decision and remanded 
the case for readjudication in compliance with directives 
specified in a July 2010 Joint Motion filed by counsel for the 
Veteran and the VA Secretary.  


FINDING OF FACT

In October 2010, the Board was notified by the RO that the 
Veteran died in September 2010.


CONCLUSION OF LAW

Due to the death of the Veteran, the Board has no jurisdiction to 
adjudicate the merits of this claim at this time.  38 U.S.C.A. § 
7104(a) (West 2002); 38 C.F.R. § 20.1302 (2009); but see 
Veterans' Benefits Improvement Act of 2008, Pub. L. No. 110-389, 
§ 212, 122 Stat. 4145, 4151 (2008). 


REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

Unfortunately, the Veteran died during the pendency of the 
appeal.  As a matter of law, appellants' claims do not survive 
their deaths.  Zevalkink v. Brown, 102 F.3d 1236, 1243-44 (Fed. 
Cir. 1996); Smith v. Brown, 10 Vet. App. 330, 333-34 (1997); 
Landicho v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 42, 47 (1994).  This appeal on the 
merits has become moot by virtue of the death of the Veteran and 
must be dismissed for lack of jurisdiction.  See 38 U.S.C.A. § 
7104(a) (West 2002); 38 C.F.R. § 20.1302 (2009).

In reaching this determination, the Board intimates no opinion as 
to the merits of this appeal or to any derivative claim brought 
by a survivor of the Veteran. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1106 (2009).  

The Board's dismissal of this appeal does not affect the right of 
an eligible person to file a request to be substituted as the 
appellant for purposes of processing the claim to completion.  
Such request must be filed not later than one year after the date 
of the appellant's death.  See Veterans' Benefits Improvement Act 
of 2008, Pub. L. No. 110-389, § 212, 122 Stat. 4145, 4151 (2008) 
(creating new 38 U.S.C. § 5121A, substitution in case of death of 
a claimant who dies on or after October 10, 2008).  As provided 
for in this new provision, a person eligible for substitution 
will include "a living person who would be eligible to receive 
accrued benefits due to the claimant under section 5121(a) of 
this title ...."  The Secretary will be issuing regulations 
governing the rules and procedures for substitution upon death.  
Until such regulations are issued, an eligible party seeking 
substitution in an appeal that has been dismissed by the Board 
due to the death of the claimant should file a request for 
substitution with the VA regional office (RO) from which the 
claim originated (listed on the first page of this decision).  


ORDER

The appeal is dismissed.


		
Mark D. Hindin
	Veterans Law Judge, Board of Veterans' Appeals


 Department of Veterans Affairs


